I think to some extent medicine has
driven itself to the ground and I think
from a medicine has come to represent
not those what I would call a profoundly
beneficial changes
um but the but but things that are
divisive things that are uh politically
fraught
um and there's there have been I think
there's been a lot of politics at work
[Music]
foreign
and it's you know again 15 20 years 30
years
yet the disdain for Science and the
design even for doctors uh seems to be
uh growing and maybe covert was a was a
big uh Catalyst for that but why then
why why is there this well I think to
some extent it's dangerous wrong word
but I don't know what about you would
like to use I think I think to some
extent medicine has driven itself to the
ground and not uh not fully
um being able to convey its power and
its tremendous impact on human history
um I mean I'll just give you the
broadest example of this
um I mean it's in the book as well I
mean in the 1850s or in the uh less than
100 years ago
um the chances that when you had a child
that you would die in childbirth or in
certain areas on the order of 20 30
percent
um childbirth was a deadly event
the chances that you would die in uh
before you were 60 years old was you
know on the order of 70 80 percent
um lifespans uh were 40 50 60 years you
would be lucky if you were six years old
um in the last less than a century even
50 odd years we've seen an extension of
lifespan into well into the 80s in some
countries
um and we've seen the oldest humans well
into their hundred and tens 115s 120s
and so forth so there's been a real
there's been a massive change
um mostly
um uh effected I think By changes in
larger it's not like medical
intervention has caused all of this
mostly affected by larger changes in
hygiene sanitation psych you know
social and Behavioral Health but Health
nonetheless
and I think medicine has come to
represent not those what I would call a
profoundly beneficial changes
um but the but but things that are
divisive things that are uh politically
fraught and there's there have been I
think there's been a lot of politics at
work
um in the sense of sort of the
anti-science movement the anti-vaxxer
movement being one one edge of that the
anti-science movement so I think some of
it is the fault of is the fault of
medicine itself
um in unbean being unable to convey its
value
um to humans and some of it has been the
politicization and the divisiveness and
the um the use of medicine as a a
scapegoat
um for uh political divisiveness both in
this country and in many countries
around the world
so also do you think it's kind of
paradoxical that this anti-science
movement has also come at a time when uh
you know medical advancement has touched
almost all lives and you know saved so
many lives so do you see that as a kind
of a well there's some Paradox about it
but as I said medicines and medicine and
science has done a particularly bad job
in in conveying demystifying
um and and and really pushing it making
the public understand what it is about
what it's doing what its purpose is what
it's sort of what the grand project is
of when it's a very poor job of it and I
think that's and the result of it as I
said is partly the fault of of medicine
and the medical sciences and partly
because of the political device that has
been used as a tool is it also the
Commerce of it I mean there's a sense
that absolutely there's a sense that the
motivation for science is becoming more
and more commercial than it was would
you agree with that and and
um so um to some extent yes I mean the
motivation of science has become
commercial there's certainly an element
to that which is not necessarily a bad
thing I was just going to say exactly
that which is that you know
um the the motivation of Technology
digital technology has been explicitly
commercial
um and in fact you could make the you
could make a very strong argument that
digital technology and social media are
are good you know have certainly have
had empowering roles in our society but
I've had grotesquely uh divisive roles
in our society even today
um you know the main use of Facebook and
Twitter seems to be to troll other
people
um etc etc but you don't see you don't
see the same disdain for digital
technology which is number one highly
commercialized it's a sole purpose seems
to be to make Mark Zuckerberg some extra
money
um or Elon Musk for that matter
um it's uh you know it's uh it's
divisiveness and its political
divisiveness seems to be if anything
um just as deep if not much worse than
medicine but you don't see um you know
people standing outside the office of
Facebook with uh with posters or maybe
you do but you certainly don't see the
the the public uh backlash uh the
anti-science or anti-medicine backlash
that you see
um part of it also is because you know
we think of it perhaps accurately we
think of medicine as as something that
is is supposed to be benign it's
supposed to be not commercial it's
supposed to have um hold itself to
higher ethical values and ethical
standards and that's absolutely Fair it
is it's a humanistic science it's the
most human of all Sciences
um where whereas uh maybe maybe the
digital world got off easy by by
starting to portray itself as a Godzilla
and ending up as a Godzilla yeah but I
mean I you know in your book and I think
in your books I've not read all of them
but I certainly have washed up into like
there's a sense that I get where you but
big Pharma is kind of a villain in in
the book I mean big mama was a character
it'd be a villain I mean to what extent
do you think you know uh they've been
extremely exploitative somewhat
exploitative
but you know is Big Pharma become the
villain globally that big oil used to be
at one point
um I think big Pharma has become the
villain I personally don't think it is
the villain
um I personally don't think I think some
big Pharma can be a villain just like I
think uh big oil can be a villain is a
villain in fact to some extent I think
it is a greater villain
um I think
um you know uh big digital Tech
um can be in and is a villain I mean it
really depends
um we would not
um have the Global Outreach of
vaccination not just for covet but for
all vaccines had it not been for
companies yeah just to name a few you
know Pfizer modern and among you know
AstraZeneca among them you can't you you
can't produce you know a small company a
small startup cannot produce
um medicines for the world you need the
pharmacy if I was to wave a magic wand
and make the pharmaceutical industry
disappear I can guarantee it it will be
a loss for human beings of course
um and so
on the other hand I think the flip side
of that is of course that the
pharmaceutical industry needs to take
itself and its responsibility is pretty
seriously
um and uh find a middle ground which it
really hasn't just now it has to some
extent but it hadn't it was you know
highly resistive
um highly resistant
um to change highly resistant to the
idea of social good
um and finally after multiple years of
resistance has finally come to come to a
place where it's trying to recognize and
starting to recognize the idea that it
has to make some deep changes within
itself I don't think that I don't think
big farmers I mean as I said if I was to
wave a magic wand and make Pfizer
AstraZeneca and um you know whatever you
know Bristol Motor script disappear I
think the world would be poorer for it
um but on the other hand I also do think
that the pharmaceutical Universe the
needs to take itself very take its
responsibilities quite seriously I'll
give you one last example of this
um all of you might must remember the
role that cipla so I know
um uh Yusuf Hamid as a as a friend I
have the pleasure of knowing him as a
friend remember the role siplup played
in in during the AIDS pandemic at one
point of time in most of uh most of
Africa virtually all the AIDS medicines
were coming from cipla until the
um until you know world trade agreements
uh really led by the pharmaceutical
Lobby slapped uh you know hand slapped
and handcuffed
um cipla and um you know essentially
made the uh the creation of of
antiretrovirals
monopolized the creation of materials
um since then there have been you know
since that moment I think many of these
companies have come to realize that
there are greater social goods that they
need to deliver on and have started
taking their role in in all of this much
more seriously much more effectively and
much more responsibly